Okay, discovery, what is it?
Well, discovery phase is a period of time,
which can be anything from
a single workshop if it's a very
cheap project to about eight weeks for
a bigger internal project.
The phase is just dedicated to defining
the problem that needs to be solved,
and the project's scope.
And it's also there to help unearth any
potential issues that might come up,
right?
Is there legacy technology that's gonna
limit us is there compliance issues that
are gonna limit us.
So we clear about who the user or
the audience is,
have we done our user research?
What are our feelings about accessibility?
Who's gonna run this site for
the long term?
All of those questions you deal
within discovery up front.
So why should you do this?
So carrying out discovery fails helps to
reduce your scope creep because it will
uncover any constraints to the design and
provide better context for
decision making during the project.
So what do you actually do
in the discovery phase?
How do you run them?
Typically you'll do some user research,
you'll interview any key stakeholders
that are involved in the project.
You might wanna carry out a competitive
analysis, that's something that sometimes
I do in discoveries depends
on the size of the project.
You research any constraints
that exist around the project.
And you might review any website or
apps or
anything kind of that is there
already serving a similar purpose.
So that's all the things you could
do in a discovery phase, but
I'm very conscious that there are probably
people watching this that are,
working on much smaller projects and
it's like, well, that's quite a lot.
I've only got five grand budget for
the whole thing.
So you don't need to do all of that,
you can condense your discovery phase into
a kickoff meeting or something similar.
So what is the minimum that I like to do
with the discovery phase when budgets
are really tight or when I'm advising
agencies with really tight budgets?
Well, I kinda do a couple of things.
First of all, I do something
called an empathy mapping, right?
So I'll sit down with the client and
we'll brainstorm some basic stuff about
the audience we're trying to reach,
what tasks do they wanna complete?
What journey are they on what influences
them what their overall goals and
pain points and feelings are, right?
So basically a persona.
If you want more detail on
creating those empathy maps,
I've linked to an article I wrote
that discusses how to do that.
I'm not gonna get into
the depths of doing that here.
But just basically to
understand your users properly,
only takes about half an hour
to do an exercise like that.
And then the other thing I do is defined
some key performance indicators,
all right?
So what do I mean by that?
Well, we basically need a measurable
way of knowing whether this site has
succeeded.
So, it typically clients are really
crappy at defining this.
So I tend to have to guide them
through the process and again,
there's an article about how to do that.
But I'll take their overall
company objectives, right?
What are you trying to do
in the next fiscal year?
Okay, we're trying to increase revenue.
Well, that's too vague for us to use
as a measurable thing on this project.
But okay, what does that translate to?
How does the website help with
that goal of increasing revenue?
Well, it needs to generate more leads.
Okay, that's great,
that's a bit more tangible.
Okay, what can we do that actually
really we can measure then?
Okay, well,
we can measure maybe the number of online
forms submitted on the website, or
the number of people visiting the contact
us page, really tangible things.
And tying that down upfront is
invaluable to you because it will
mean that if you can prove
that the design is working.
And you can also remind people what their
goals are when they go off on tangents and
go, well, I want the social media
buttons really big on the homepage.
But hang on a minute you said your primary
goal was more leads not more followers,
all right?
So it's really good to have
these well defined goals.
So just do that.
If that's all you can do, that's great.
So, how do you decide on the cost of that?
Well, normally you're kinda forced at the
beginning of a project to give a ballpark
for the whole thing.
There's no getting around that everybody
wants to budget, don't commit to it.
But say, previous projects I've worked
on that are not dissimilar to this come
in the ballpark of 30k,
right, or whatever it be.
So, for the discovery phase I
recommend dedicating about 10% of
the that to the discovery phase,
that big ballpark figure.
So if you said the 30K, 3K,
how much we're probably gonna spend
doing a discovery phase, right?
And then you tailor your discovery phase
to fit within that approximate budget.
So that's how I price that first bit,
which is a bit kinda neppy lesson.
It's very much dependent on
how big the project is and
how much they've got to spend on it.